---
tags: [CC]
title: 3.Reducibility
created: '2020-05-23T14:39:14.816Z'
modified: '2020-05-24T18:16:11.235Z'
---

# 3.Reducibility

[//]: # (Primary = #BB86FC)
[//]: # (Secondary = #03DAC5)
[//]: # (Secondary = #FF0266)

A <b>reduction</b> is a way of converting one problem to another problem in sucha way that a solution to the second problem can be used to solve the first problem. Reducibility involves two problems, which we call $A$ and $B$. If $A$ reduces to $B$, we can use a solution to $B$ to solve $A$. So in our example, $A$ is the problem of finding your way around the city and $B$ is the problem of obtaining a map. Note that reducibility says nothing about solving $A$ or $B$ alone, but only about the solvability of $A$ in the presence of a solution to $B$.

<h2 style="color:#BB86FC">Undecidable Problem</h2>

We have already established the undecidability of $A_{TM}$, the problem of determining whether a Turing machine accepts a given input.
Let's consider a related problem, $HALT_{TM}$, the problem of determining whether a Turing machine halts (by accepting or rejecting) on a given input. This problem is known as the <b>halting problem</b>. We use the undecidability of the halting problem by reducing $A_{TM}$ to $HALT_{TM}$. Let

$HALT_{TM} = \{\langle M, w \rangle\ | M \text{ is a TM and M halts on input }w\}.$


<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 1 : Statement</h4>

$HALT_{TM}$ is undecidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 1 : Proof</h4>

This proof is by contradiction. We assume that $HALT_{TM}$ is decidable and use that assumption to show that $A_{TM}$ is decidable, contradicting the previous section. The key idea is to show that $A_{TM}$ is reducible to $HALT_{TM}$. 

Let's assume for the purpose of obtaining a contradiction that TM $R$ decides $HALT_{TM}$. We construct TM $S$ to decide $A_{TM}$, with $S$ operating as follows.

S = "On input $\langle M, w \rangle$, an encoding of a TM $M$ and a string $w$:
  1. Run TM $R$ in input $\langle M, w \rangle$
  2. If $R$ rejects, $reject$.
  3. If $R$ accepts, simulate $M$ on $w$ until it halts.
  4. If $M$ has accepted, $accept$; if $M$ has rejected, $reject$."

Clearly, if $R$ decides $HALT_{TM}$, then $S$ decides $A_{TM}$. Because $A_{TM}$ is undecidable, $HALT_{TM}$ also must be undecidable.


---

This past section illustrates a strategy for proving that a problem is undecidable. This strategy is common to most proofs of undecidability, except for the undecidability of $A_{TM}$ itself, which is proved directly via the diagnolization method.

We now present several other theorems and their proofs as further examples of the reducibility method for proving undecidability. Let

$E_{TM} = \{ \langle M \rangle | M \text{ is a TM and L(M)=} \empty\}$

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 2 : Statement</h4>

$E_{TM}$ is undecidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 2 : Proof</h4>

We can follow the same pattern as before, assume that $E_{TM}$ is decidable and prove that $A_{TM}$-a contradiction.
Let $R$ be a $TM$ that decides $E_{TM}$. We use $R$ to construct TM $S$ that decides $A_{TM}$.  
We run $R$ on $\langle M \rangle$, we run $R$ on a modification of $\langle M \rangle$. We modify $\langle M \rangle$ to guarantee that $M$ rejects all strings except $w$, but on input $w$ it works as usual. Then we use $R$ to determine whether the modified machine recognizes the empty language. The only string the machine can now accept is $w$, so its language will be nonempty iff it accepts $w$.
<br>
Let's write the modified machine described in the proof idea using our standard notation. We call it $M_1$.

$M_1$ = "On input $x$:
  1. If $x \neq w$, reject.
  2. If $x = w$, run $M$ on input $w$ and $accept$ if $M$ does."

This machine has the string $w$ as part of its description. It conducts the test whether $x = w$ in the obvious way, by scanning the input and comparing it character by character with $w$ to determine whether they are the same.

Putting all this together, we assume that TM $R$ decides $E_{TM}$ and construct TM $S$ that decides $A_{TM}$ as follows.

S = "On input $\langle M, w \rangle$, an encoding of a TM $M$ and a string $w$:

  1. Use the description of $M$ and $w$ to construct the TM $M_1$ just described.
  2. Run $R$ on input $\langle M_1 \rangle$.
  3. If $R$ accepts, $reject$; if $R$ rejects, $accept$."

If $R$ were a decider for $E_{TM}$, $S$ would be a decider for $A_{TM}$. A decider for $A_{TM}$ cannot exist, so we know that $E_{TM}$ must be undecidable.

---

The general idea here is that we want to prove these by generally going back to things we've proved in different sections. So we assume the given theorem is correct and decidable, then we reduce it to a problem we've already proven to not be decidable, commonly $A_{TM}$ or $E_{TM}$ and prove by contradiction.


<h2 style="color:#BB86FC">Reductions via Computation Histories</h2>

The computation history method is also a very important technique for proving that $A_{TM}$ is reducible to certain languages. This method is often useful when the problem to be shown undecidable involves testing for the existence od something.


<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Definition 3</h4>

Let $M$ be a Turing machine and $w$ an input string. An <b>accepting computation history</b> for $M$ on $w$ is a sequence of configurations, $C_1, C_2, ..., C_l$ where $C_1$ is the start configuration of $M$ on $w$, $C_l$ is an accepting configuration of $M$, and each $C_i$ legally follows from $C_{i-1}$ according to the rules of $M$. A <b>rejecting computation history</b> for M on $w$ is defined similarly, except that $C_l$ is a rejecting configuration.

<br>

Computation histories are finite sequences. If $M$ doesn't halt on $w$, no accepting or rejecting computation history exists for $M$ on $w$. Deterministic machines have at most one computation history on any given input. Nondeterministic machines have many computation histories on a single input, corresponding to the various branches.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Definition 4</h4>

A <b>linear bounded automaton</b> is a restricted type of Turing machine wherein the tape head isn't premitted to move off the portion of the tape containing the input. If the machine tries to move its head off either end of the input, the head stays where it is-in the same way that head will not move off the left-hand end of an ordinary Turing machine's tape.


Despite their memory constraint, linear bounded automata (LBAs) are quite powerful. Here, $A_{LBA}$ is the problem of determining whether an $LBA$ accepts its input. Even though $A_{LBA}$ is the same as the undecidable problem $A_{TM}$ where the Turing machine is restricted to be an LBA, we can show that $A_{LBA}$ is decidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Lemma 1</h4>

Let $M$ be an LBA with $q$ states and $g$ symbols in the tape alphabet. There are exactly $qng^n$ distinct configurations of $M$ for a tape of length $n$.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 3 : Statement</h4>

$A_{LBA}$ is decidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 3 : Proof</h4>
In order to decide whether LBA $M$ accepts input $w$, we simulate $M$ on $w$. During the course of the simulation, if $M$ halts and accepts or rejects, we accept or reject accordingly. The difficulty occurs if $M$ loops on $w$. We need to be able to detect looping so that we can halt and reject.

The idea for detecting when $M$ is looping is that as $M$ computes on $w$, it fgoes from configuration to configuration. If $M$ ever repeats a configuration, it would go on to repeat this configuration over and over again and thus be in a loop. Because $M$ is an $LBA$, the amount of tape available to it is limited. $M$ can be in only a limited number of configurations on this amount of tape. Detecting that $M$ is looping is possible by simulating $M$ for the number of steps given by the previous lemma. If $M$ has not halted by then, it must be looping. We can formally write this as :

$L$ = "On input $\langle M, w \rangle$, where $M$ is an $LBA$ and $w$ is a string:

  1. Simulate $M$ on $w$ for $qng^n$ steps or until it halts.
  2. If $M$ has halted, $accept$ if it has accepted and $reject$ if it has rejected. If it has not halted, $reject$."

If $M$ on $w$ has not halted within $qng^n$ steps, it must be repeating a configuration according to the previous lemme and therefore looping. That is why our algorithm rejects in this instance.


<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 4 : Statement</h4>
Let $E_{LBA} = \{ \langle M \rangle | M \text{is an LBA where }L(M) = \empty$. <br>
$E_{LBA}$ is undecidable.


<h2 style="color:#BB86FC">Mapping Reducibility</h2>

The notion of reducing one problem to another may be defined formally in one of several ways. The choice of which one to use depends on the application. Our choice is a simple type of reducibility called <b>mapping reducibility</b>.


<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Computable functions</h3>
A turing machine computes a function by starting with the input of the function on the tape and halting with the output of the function on the tape.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Definition 5</h4>
A function $f : \Sigma^* \rightarrow \Sigma^*$ is a <b>computable function</b> if some Turing machine $M$, on every input $w$, halts with just $f(w)$ on its tape.


<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Formal Definition of Mapping Reducibility</h3>
Now we define mapping reducibility. As usual, we represent computational problems by languages. 

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Definition 6</h4>
Language A is <b>mapping reducible</b> to language $B$, written $A \leq_m B$, if there is a computational function $f : \Sigma^* \rightarrow \Sigma^*$, where for every $w$, 

$w \in A \iff f(w) \in B$.

the function $f$ is called the <b>reduction</b> from A to B.


<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 5 : Statement</h4>

If $A \leq_m B$ and $B$ is decidable, then $A$ is decidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 5 : Proof</h4>

We let $M$ be the decider for $B$ and $f$ be the reduction from $A$ to $B$. We describe a decider $N$ for $A$ as follows.

$N$ = "On input $w$:
  1. Compute $f(w)$.
  2. Run $M$ on input $f(w)$ and output whatever $M$ outputs."

Clearly, if $w \in A$, then $f(w) \in B$ because $f$ is a reduction from $A$ to $B$. Thus, $M$ accepts $f(w)$ whenever $w \in A$. Therefore, $N$ works as desired.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Corollary 1</h4>

If $A \leq_m B$ and $A$  is undecidable, then $B$ is undecidable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 6 : Statement</h4>

If $A \leq_m B$ and $B$ is Turing-recognizable, then $A$ is Turing-recognizable.

The proof is the same as that of Theorem 5, except that $M$ and $N$ are recognizers instead of deciders.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Corollary 2</h4>

If $A \leq_{m} B$ and $A$ is not Turing-recognizable, then $B$ is not Turing-recognizable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 7 : Statement</h4>

$EQ_{TM}$ is neither Turing-recognizable nor co-Turing-recognizable.

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">Theorem 7 : Proof</h4>

