---
tags: [CC]
title: 5.Space Complexity
created: '2020-05-23T22:13:20.013Z'
modified: '2020-05-24T15:38:02.974Z'
---

# 5.Space Complexity

[//]: # (Primary = #BB86FC)
[//]: # (Secondary = #03DAC5)
[//]: # (Secondary = #FF0266)

In this chapter, we consider the complexity of computational problems in terms of the amount of space, or memory, that they require. Time and space are two of the most important considerations when we seek practical solutions to many computational problems.

<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Definition 1</h3>

Let $M$ be a deterministic Turing machine that halts on all inputs. The <b>space complexity</b> of $M$ is the function $f : \N \rightarrow \N$, where $f(n)$ is the maximum number of tape cells that $M$ scans on any input of length $n$. If the space complexity of $M$ is $f(n)$, we also say that $M$ runs in space $f(n)$.

If $M$ is nondeterministic Turing machine wherein all branches halt on all inputs, we define its space complexity $f(n)$ to be the maximum number of tape cells that $M$ scanes on any branch of its computation for any input of lenth $n$.


<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Definition 2</h3>

Let $f : \N \rightarrow \R^+$ be a function. The <b>space complxity classes, $SPACE(f(n))$</b> and <b>$NSPACE(f(n))$</b>, are defined as follows.

$SPACE(f(n)) = \{ L | L \text{is a language decided by an} O(f(n)) \text{ space deterministic Turing machine}.\}$

$NSPACE(f(n)) = \{ L | L \text{is a language decided by an} O(f(n)) \text{ space nondeterministic Turing machine}.\}$


<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Examples</h3>

<h4 style="color:#FF0266">SAT</h4>

We previously introduced the NP-complete problem SAT. Here, we show that SAT can be solved with a linear space algorithm. We believe that SAT cannot be resolved with a polynomial time algorithm, much less with a linear time algorithm, because SAT is NP-complete. Space appears to be more powerful than time because space can be reused, whereas time cannot.

$M_1$ = "On input $\langle \phi \rangle$, where $\phi$ is a boolean formula:

1. For each truth assignment to the variables $x_1,...,x_m$ of $\phi$:
  2. Evaluate $\phi$ on that truth assignment.
3. If $\phi$ ever evaluated to 1, $accept$; if not, $reject$."

Machine $M_1$ clearly runs in linear space because each iteration of the loop can reuse the same portion of the tape. The machine needs to store only the current truth assignment, and that can be done with $O(m)$ space. The number of variables $m$ is at most $n$, the length of the input, so this machine runs in space $O(n)$.

TBF
