---
tags: [SADS]
title: 1.2 Dependability Metrics
created: '2020-05-27T22:35:19.697Z'
modified: '2020-05-28T07:09:49.413Z'
---

# 1.2 Dependability Metrics

[//]: # (Primary = #BB86FC)
[//]: # (Secondary = #03DAC5)
[//]: # (Secondary = #FF0266)

There are some metrics that measure reliability, availability, and safety dependability attributes. However, there are no commonly accepted metrics for correctness or security attributes.

<h2 style="color:#BB86FC">Reliability and MTTF/MTBF/MTTR </h2>

<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Definition - Reliability</h3>

The _reliability_ $R(t)$ of a system $S$ is defined as the probability $S$ is delivering correct service in the time interval $[0, t]$.

* A metric for the reliability $R(t)$ for non repairable systems is the Mean Time To Failure (MTTF), normaally expressed in hours.

* A metric for the reliability $R(t)$ for repairable systems is the Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF), normally expressed in hours.

* The mean time it takes to repair a repairable system is called the Mean Time To Repair (MTTR), normally expressed in house.

* These metrics are meaningful in the steady-state, i.e., when the system does not change or evolve.


<h2 style="color:#BB86FC">Availability</h2>

<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Definition - Availibility</h3>

The _availability_ $A(t)$ of a system $S$ is defined as the probability that $S$ is delivering correct service at time $t$.

* A metric for the average, steady-state availability of a repairable system is $A = MTBF / (MTBF + MTTR)$, normally expressed in percent.

* A certain percentage-value may be more or less useful depending on the "faulure distribution" (the "brustiness" of the failures).

* Critical computing systems often have to guarantee a certain availability. Availability requirements are ususally defined in service level agreements.


<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Availability and the number of nines</h3>

It is common practice to express the degrees of availability by the number of nines. For example, "5 nines availability" means 99.999% availability.

<h3 style="color:#03DAC5">Safety</h3>

The safety $S(t)$ of a system $S$ is defined as the probability that $S$ is delivering correct service or has failed in a manner that does cause no harm in $[0, t]$.

* A metric for safety $S(t)$ is the Mean Time To Catastrophic Failure (MTTC), defined similarly to MTTF and normally expressed in hours.
* Safety is reliability with respect to malign failures.


